[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology greetings and welcome everyone
to church history and theology today we
are going to delve into something that's
going to require a great deal of focus
we're going to cover all manner of
textual uh history as well as for
scriptures and so forth so I tell you
what if you have your Bibles you're
going to need them if you don't have
your Bibles go ahead and pause it and go
grab them um everything I'm going to
talk about I am going to read out but I
want you to be able to see some of these
things for
yourself uh if you also have a copy of
uh the Apocrypha um the apocryphal books
you're welcome to go grab those as well
uh if your Bible has a copy of those in
it you know well that makes uh two birds
with one stone at least as far as this
study is concerned
today is a study on the Old Testament
canon in the first century what was the
state of the canon in the first
century I am addressing this because
there's so many different myths that
float around uh I got to see several
aspects of this happening on social
media even this past week uh and I
really want to address this from a
church history perspective more than
just a thematic idea and so I I'm adding
this episode in I was not planning on
doing this episode but I spent the last
two weeks working through the whole uh
background of it and I want to share
with you what is a good healthy
Protestant background perspective on
this I do not pretend to have an
unbiased perspective uh nobody does if
you are pretending to have a an unbiased
perspective on this you are lying first
to yourself and then to everybody else
um I'm Protestant I believe that I can
put forward that we actually have the
best historical and consistent case on
this matter and I want to show you that
from the historicals texts themselves as
well as the scriptures the habits of
both Jesus and the apostles so we will
get into all of these things you're
certainly going to need your Bible
because again this is church history and
theology we will always be uh having the
Bible nearby and at hand so but as we go
into this there are other texts things
like first and 2 macbes fourth mccabes
um and some of the letters from the uh
from the inner testamental period uh as
well as Pho and Josephus and a bunch of
other things so what things that I want
you to see I will be reading but if you
have access to those uh more so much the
better uh to be able to see them for
yourself let's go into this why why are
we doing this one I I'm doing this
because there's so many different myths
that float around about the first
century the church as well as the Jewish
people and their view of the Old
Testament or the Hebrew scriptures uh I
there's there's a great deal of
misunderstanding about this because
there's there's there's myths that float
around that uh there are those who held
to you know this or that and then uh it
was completely unsettled and everyone
was confused nobody had any real answers
everything's pical it's not that hard in
fact it is quite a clear case that is
made and there's a reason why behind it
and we're going to walk through most of
these now if you are coming to this
episode looking for all of my thoughts
on the apocryphal books this is not the
episode for that I will address them as
far as it has to do with the Old
Testament cannon in the first century
when we get to uh those who have uh
issues with what position I'm going to
be taking here in this episode but there
is a later episode planned for the
apocryphal books in their entirety um
that will be towards the end of the
second beginning of the third Century so
we're like a year year and a half away
from that episode um so that is planned
for for the future because that's really
when the apocryphal books start
affecting church history much more so
and so we'll take it up there so for
this our plan is to limit the discussion
to the year 100 at the most uh the 100
AD I want to keep the limit there
because there we are we're dealing with
the apostolic age has closed uh church
history has uh begun and where does the
concept of the uh in in in Comm paran's
Old Testament but I find that even uh
even some of our our Jewish friends have
issues even with that terminology I
understand so we'll just deal with the
term Hebrew scriptures um and those
things the Oracles of God that were
given to the Jewish people what was the
Jewish what was the Christian
perspective on these things in the first
century the reason I want to study this
though other than the fact that it came
up is that for our purposes as we go
through church history this really helps
us understand where the early church
took their Foundation from when we read
texts like 2 Timothy 3:16 and it
expresses that all scripture is inspired
by God and uh profitable for Doctrine uh
reproof and training and instruction and
righteous that the man of God may be
perfect you know those uh those things
that they refer to as the scriptures
what exactly did that entail what are we
to understand when we read that is it
laid out the same way is it is it uh
numbered the same way way does it
contain most importantly the same books
uh or does it contain more or less these
are important questions obviously
because they deal with the Central and
ultimate rule of faith that is the very
scriptures of God what is it that God
spoke because if we were to listen to
the words of Jesus what God spoke should
be of utmost importance to us because as
Christ himself says the scriptures
cannot be broken and the jots and the
titles in the law and the prophets will
absolutely be fulfilled and I think we
can make a good Apostolic uh point to
the fact that Christ has indeed already
done that so this study helps ground our
study in church history going forward if
you listen to some uh you'll think that
Christians of all Stripes disagree over
the Old Testament and the New Testament
documents um the New Testament Canon is
really not our Focus for today at all
this is all to deal with the Old
Testament or the Hebrew scriptures
the story of the New Testament Canon is
much longer into church history as you
know we've already actually put up an
initial episode on that the New
Testament canon in the church but we got
several more episodes on that as we go
through uh the the centuries one by one
because that conversation continued on
into the
300s um but hardly anyone that teaches
church history spends an entire episode
on what is it that we started with as
far as for the Canon of scripture and I
wanted to include that because it is
something of particular Fascination for
me
because at the at the consideration of
all these things the Old Testament As We
Lay out the scriptures makes up nearly
80% of all
scripture and so the very fact that the
apostles are starting with 80% of
scripture that the church starts with
80% of the scripture even before the
first New Testament document is given
that gives us a great grounding to
understand what are they working from
what are they preaching from what are
they doing with the scriptures and uh
from that we can actually also deduce
what exactly did they consider to be
scripture so let me help you with a bit
of orientation because we're going to be
throwing a lot of terms out a lot of
words out there's going to be a lot of
stuff here so um if you are and again
I'm teaching this from the Protestant
perspective so I'm going to be using
terms that are familiar to us you go
pick up a book uh a Bible from uh the
Christian bookstore or whatever uh
typically unless it's a Catholic an
orthodox Bible you're going to be
looking at a a Bible with 39 books in
the Old Testament uh they are the same
39 books that are found in the Jewish
Canon if you go to a Jewish bookstore
and you pick up a copy of their
scriptures uh it's going to be called a
Tanakh uh TN K it's kind of like an
acronym uh T stands for Torah uh neim is
for the n and the K is Kim uh the these
three terms are representative of in the
Jewish Canon the the concept of uh of
the uh of The Testament of their
scriptures is divided into three
sections Torah is the law this would be
the the Books of Moses the neim are the
prophets uh IM is just plural uh the
neim are the prophets and then the Kim
are the writings this would be the
histories this would be like 2
Chronicles and all of that um and so
they lay that out in a very different
way in the uh in the 39 books as we lay
out the new the Old Testament typically
follows the uh another pattern which
starts with the Torah just like everyone
does and then actually does the
historical books the the Kim first and
then the neim later and that's why our
Old Testament ends with
Prophets The Jewish
Canon is uh listed out as 22 or 24 books
depending on who you pay attention to
and who you read uh the current uh the
current Tanaka is laid out as 24 books
uh there are others who have counted
that as 22 again that's not that's not
cutting out books that's combining other
books uh the 24 books though of the
modern Tanakh is the identical uh books
to the Protestant Old Testament all 39
are in there they just so like if you
have um if you have first and second
Samuel they're combined together as one
or if you have um for instance all the
Minor Prophets are combined together
into a single book called The 12 you
know so that all those types of things
but if you if you take out all of the
you know headings and Arrangements
they're the same books the same 39 books
of the Protestant Old Testament are the
same 39 books or 24 books of the Jewish
Canon of today as well as the Jewish
Canon of the first century which I will
go out and show you at this
point when we when we look at the issue
of this it really comes back to the
concept of inspiration at the core your
doctrine of inspiration your doctrine of
what makes up the word of God will
inform how you study things and what you
expect to see in history with regards to
Canon issues so for instance when we see
in the history of the Jewish people they
were able to perceive that God had
ceased sending prophets after the close
of the ministry of M Mali after the days
of the last prophets of Hagi and Malachi
once they died there were no
prophets this is written of not only in
the talmudic literature of later times
after the Christian age we actually have
it written of in the era of the macbes
to discuss that the prophetic voice had
ceased that there were no prophets that
were still around in the world and that
we dealt with what we had with there
were no prophets who were after the age
of Malachi saying things like thus says
the Lord uh there was nobody that was
giving the word from God because the
spirit of the prophets had
ceased one of the places that you can
look this up if if you have a copy of
first mccabes is in chapter
9 and verse
27 now the book The mccabes if you're
not familiar again when we come to the
apocryphal books uh I'll give you an
overview of that uh in in the future but
at this point just suffice it to say
this is a historical document first
macbes is actually quite reliable as a
histo as a
history it is one of the apocryphal
books but it is a good historical book
with regards to at least addressing the
worldview of the time uh involved in the
second century BC so we're talking here
250 years before uh the or excuse me 200
years before the era that we're
considering listen to 1 macbes chapter
9: 27 uh we kind of drop right in the
middle of a story here but there's a
reference here that's really
important he's talking about the the
issues that were going on during the
maban revolt and said that there was
great distress in Israel in these days
the likes of which had not been since
the days when the prophet ceased to be
among them
that kind of reference is not a singular
reference that is one that is held kind
of unanimous across the way that the
people of God in Israel were able to
perceive that once the ministry of
Malachi had ended that God stopped
sending
prophets and that there was no uh
development of of somebody coming along
and saying thus says the Lord this now
that doesn't mean to say that every
single scripture is thus says the Lord
does not to say that at all uh but it is
to say the prophetic Ministry had ceased
and typically the historical Works uh
and the poetic works and and the Psalms
followed the ministry of the prophets in
these
ways first mccabes continues on in
chapter 14 ver
41 to say that the Jewish people and
their priests have therefore resolved
that Simon is to be their permanent
leader and high priest until a true
Prophet should appear he has to act as
their governor and to have complete
charge of the sanctuary and its
functions and in addition the
supervision of the country its weapons
strongholds etc etc this concept again
continues on first macbes at least
addresses to us the worldview of those
who are living in the time of the 2
Century BC saw that there was no
prophets I think it is important for us
to address that they're able to perceive
this the these are aspects of how the
mind of God works in using fallible
people to be able to pick up when he is
is speaking and when he is not Jesus
himself addresses this uh to to the
people as they are speaking to him in
the Gospel of John where he expresses
that his sheep hear his
voice and there were True Believers in
Israel in every age as Elijah learned
there were True Believers in Israel in
every age and they are able to hear the
voice of the shepherd the true
Shepherd and here we just get historical
clues that as we work up to the first
century that they were able to perceive
that the prophetic Ministry had
ceased we have contained also in the
book of First mccabes a letter uh by
Judas macabus brother Jonathan affas uh
who took over the Revolt after judas's
death and he expresses not only did they
perceive that the prophetic Ministry had
ceased but you will see here in in this
letter a reference to the fact that they
actually have the sacred book all with
them watch this uh in in uh 1 mccabes
12: 5 through
n he says this is a copy of the letter
that Jonathan wrote to the Spartans
verse 6 Jonathan the high priest the
Senate of the nation the priest and the
rest of the Jewish people send greetings
to their brothers the Spartans quite
some time ago a letter was sent to
annias the high priest from Aras your
king stating that you were indeed our
brothers as the attached copy shows
onias welcomed the envoy with honor and
accepted the letter on which was set
forth a a clear Declaration of Alliance
and friendship and here's the point here
although we have no need of such things
in as much as we have as our source of
encouragement the sacred books in our
possession we have decided to request
and renewal of our pact of family ties
and friendship with you so that we may
not become aranged from you for a great
many years have elapsed since you last
contacted us and the letter continues
on they saw a difference between what
they were doing between the age that
they were living in and what is referred
to as the sacred
books this this concept of the prophetic
office having ceased and that there are
now books that bring encouragement that
they are to uh continue to take
encouragement from uh sets us up to
understand what we're about to see
fairly well
and so now I want to introduce you to
what it is that we actually have that
Clues us into what was in these sacred
books what makes them up what is
entailed in all of them and what is the
view of first century Jews and
Christians with regards to what the
inspired word of God was before the
first century and then obviously has
ramifications for them in the first
century
first there was a
cannon I want that to sink in fairly
hard there was a cannon and it was
recognized even before the first
century that Cannon was referred to in
short as the law and the
prophets it was referred to that way
because it is the main sections of what
has gone on before is that God expressed
his law and he promised for a messiah to
come in fact Jesus has already explained
this to us for any of us who are
familiar that all of these things in the
law and the prophets are about
him you see this in the book of second
mccabes written about the year 100 BC
second mccabes
15 we'll pick up in verse eight
well we'll pick up in verse 7 however uh
this is second mccabes 15:7 however
macabus uh remained
confident firm in his belief that he
would receive help from the Lord he
urged his troops to have no fear of the
attack of the enemy but to keep in mind
the help that they had received from
heaven in former times and to remain
confident that Victory would be theirs
through the help of the almighty he
encouraged them by citing the law and
the prophet prophets and by reminding
them of the struggles they had already
survived in the past and he filled them
with fresh
enthusiasm that second mccabes Chapter
15 Section makes it clear to us that
their sacred writings that they
possessed this is again the view of Jews
in the in the in approximately 100
BC that what they are to pull their
encouragement from was the sacred
writings and what those sacred writings
are called here the law and the prophets
for those of you who are familiar with
the New Testament you should be very
familiar with this exact terminology we
will get there I promise but understand
here that this is not something that
comes from the New Testament it is
something that predates it by over 150
years by name the exact same
name in fact we even have later
references here uh from the book of
fourth
macbes uh which again I will simply
point out uh if for those of you who are
uh who are Protestants you may you may
have heard of the books of mccabes
before um and and you know you kind of
know that they're I I guess about
something that happened you know between
the Old and New Testament uh let me just
give you a concept of this as far as for
reliability of these they're very
different from one another first macbes
second mabes third macbes and fourth
macbes there's four of them um so like
for instance if you are in a church that
considers first mccabes to be script
scriptures uh I can you know I I can see
why uh you would think that you know if
you read first mccabes it makes sense uh
you know but you know disagree uh if you
read second mccabes you can kind of go
you know I I see what you're thinking
you know I I I see what you're thinking
but it has some historical problems it
has some theological issues if if you
read third macbes and you you know you
address that you're just like you know
if you think that's Canon if you think
that's scripture I you know kind of you
know what are you thinking I don't I
don't even get where you're coming from
for this if you read fourth
mccabes and and you go you know this is
scripture my question to you is what
what's wrong with you you know who who
hurts you right because fourth babes is
a whole ball of wax of its own uh but it
does at least Express to us the view of
Jews at a particular time in a
particular place using common term
analogy so when I say you know open up
to Fourth mccabes and see something in
there don't don't think I'm expressing
this book as somehow uh some reliable
thing uh I'm just expressing it as a
historical Mark of evidence so before
someone gets on me about that fourth
mccabes 18 contains actually quite a
remarkable reference that uses the very
same term as second macbes does the law
and the prophets and then lists out
several historical events that are
therein and this tells us in either the
late 1 Century BC or the late 1 Century
ad what were the contents in this
author's mind of the law and the
prophets again fourth mabes is a bizarre
book we are only here to demonstrate the
view of 1 Century BC or 1 Century ad
concept of the law and the prophets and
I want you to I I just want you to hear
this right this is the this is the story
if you're familiar with fourth mccabes
this is the story of the mother and the
Seven Sons um and here she expresses the
principles to her children um I'll just
read this this is found in uh this is
found in fourth mccabes chapter 18
starting verse
6 the mother of seven sons expressed
also these principles to her
children I was a pure virgin and did not
go outside my father's house but I
guarded the rib from which women uh
woman was made no Seducer corrupted me
on a desert plane nor did the Destroyer
the deceitful serpent defile the purity
of my
virginity in the time of my maturity I
remained with my husband and when those
these Sons had grown up their father
died a fortunate man was he who lived
out his life with good children and did
not have the grief of bereavement now
pay attention here verse 10 while he was
still with you he taught you the law and
the prophets he read to you now keep
track of this he read to you about Abel
slain by Cain and Isaac who was offered
as a burnt offering and about Joseph in
prison so therefore we all have the
Genesis account he told you about the
Zeal of Phineas and he taught you about
haniah Azariah and mich and the fire he
praised Daniel in the den of lions and
blessed him he REM he reminded you of
the scripture of Isaiah which says even
though you go through fire the flame
shall not consume you he sang to you the
songs of the psalmist David who said
many are the afflictions of the
righteous he recounted to you Solomon's
proverb there is a tree of life for
those who do his will he confirmed the
query of Ezekiel shall these Dry Bones
live for he did not forget to teach you
the song of mos that Moses taught which
says I kill and I make alive this is
your life and the length of your
days I want if you paid attention and
you know the divisions of the tripartite
Canon of the Jewish people you will
recognize that the terminology of Law
and Prophets here contains both the
Torah in the stories of Abel Isaac
Joseph and the song of Moses and
unsurprisingly the prophets the nebim
that's Isaiah and Ezekiel and
Daniel but that it also this reference
of the law and Prophets includes stories
from the Kim meaning the writing
or in some other references the Psalms
and here it quotes both the Psalms and
the
Proverbs this shows us pretty directly
that what we have a reference to when we
see the law and the prophets we are not
just strictly speaking of the Torah and
the neim we are talking about all three
parts of this this is not unique by the
way to Fourth mccabes this is an example
the term law and Prophets as we're going
to see even in the New Testament the
term law and profits is a shorthand
account for all three parts of the Old
Testament scriptures that make up the
Torah the neim and the Kim you say well
you know that's that's making a big case
I want to see that so I wanted to
express to you so you have your Bibles
right turn to acts 13 I want to show you
the Apostle Paul and his treatment of
this I want to show it to you because we
typically don't deal with the con
concepts of of how all of this works out
but it is it is extremely important to
be able to De uh to develop out a
recognition of what exactly is going on
here even behind the scenes because if
you were just reading this as many many
people do if you were just reading this
in the uh in you know you're walking
through the book of Acts and you read
about this you go oh well here's well
here's Paul he's going to uh the
synagogue on the Sabbath day like he
always does and then you know they read
the law and the prophets as it says here
and then he gives this sermon what a
cool sermon he talks about some stories
and then he calls them to faith in
Christ well I want you to consider at a
deeper Point what exactly is going on
here you know because this actually
gives us a midir
century view directly into a synagogue's
worship time and he addresses them from
their Canon of scripture after it's read
this provides for us a perfect
opportunity to understand where all of
these quotes are coming from where are
all these Illusions coming from so that
we can start to understand what in
Paul's mind and what in the mind of
those who are in the synagogue there
what makes up their
Canon and again if we are to if we are
to address uh every single book you know
this would be a harder case to make but
when we start to develop this concept
and we're working our way up to this uh
that all three parts of the Hebrew Canon
are are understood even when we use the
term law profits now there's other times
where we'll use additional terms we'll
address each of those but I want you to
see this with regards to law and
Prophets here in Paul's sermon so let's
go to acts 13: 133 to 41 and yeah we
will do the whole thing here watch now
Paul and his companions set sail from
posos and came to perga in pamilia and
John left them and returned to Jerusalem
but they went on from perga and came to
Antioch in pidia right and on the
Sabbath day they went into the synagogue
and sat
down now I want you to notice something
here that's a little bit different the
concept of Antioch and pidia now if you
do not know what Antioch of pidia is
this is not the Antioch of the rest of
the book of Acts this is not Antioch in
Syria this is all the way up in the
center of Asia Minor way up towards the
area that that Paul had spent so much
time in and will be spending much time
in in the book of Acts uh this is Asia
Minor area this is up you know towards
Ephesus and myus and all of that this is
nowhere near Antioch of Syria nowhere
near Israel these are greek-speaking
Jews at a greek-speaking
synagogue listening to a former Pharisee
speak to them in Greek about the
scriptures the law and the prophets and
I want you to see the contents of these
scriptures I want you to see that it's
not just the Torah and the neim but it
also includes the Kim watch what
happens on the Sabbath day he they went
into the synagogue and sat down and
after the reading from the law and the
prophets the rulers of the synagogue
sent a message to them saying Brothers
if you have any word of encouragement
for the people say it again th this this
this continues on the history that we
saw even taking place in second mccabes
that the and first and second macbes
where the the the purpose of the Sacred
books was to bring encouragement towards
faithful to God this was the purpose of
the uh of these books this was their in
uh this was their their issue with these
right and so the same thing is
continuing on here in Antioch of pidia
way way away from
Palestine and so Paul stood up and
motioning with his hand said Mone of
Israel and you who fear God Listen by
the way that means Jews and also
God-fearing uh and uh converts that are
Gentiles so again this is all in
the God of this People Israel chose our
fathers and made the people great during
their stay in the land of Egypt and with
uplifted arm he led them out of it and
for about 40 years he put up with them
in the wilderness and after destroying
Seven Nations in the land of Canaan he
gave them their land as an inheritance
all this took about 450 years now um
here obviously Torah he undeniably so
and the the idea of the Torah has been a
settled thing for Millennia so none of
that comes as a surprise right uh and
also when they're reading the law and
the prophets law is the torath so makes
sense after that he gave them judges
until Samuel the prophet okay here we're
dealing with the neim the prophets right
uh first first and second Samuel were're
about to deal with right they they asked
for a king God gave them Saul the son of
Kish a man of the tribe of Benjamin for
40 years and when he had removed him he
raised up David to be their King uh and
so in these we have these references uh
not only to uh the neim but now uh and
and many parts of it but specifically
for Samuel's contribution in the neim
but now we start to have something else
added to this uh added to this
expression uh that in in all of these
things uh of whom he testified and said
I have found in David the son of Jesse a
man after my own heart who will do my
will of this man's Offspring God has
brought to Israel a savior Jesus just as
he had promised again this would be all
neim this would be all focused on uh the
aspect of these things uh having been
promised by the hand of uh by the hand
of these things uh or excuse me by the
hand of the prophets by the mouth of God
but again this this reference to I have
found in David the son of Jesse a man
after my own heart is a citation from
Psalm 89 which is not part of the neim
not strictly the law or the prophets but
the writings the Kim
that's important and it's not the last
one before his coming uh John had
proclaimed a baptism of repentance to
all the people of Israel and as John was
finishing his course he said what do you
suppose that I am I am not he no but
behold after me one is coming the
sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to
untie now I want to call to your mind a
verse that we will return to later on
and that is Luke 16:16 in your head the
law and the prophets were until John
right they prophesied until John John
had a purpose to to come to the world
but remember the law and the prophets
were there until John and this is
exactly what Paul is saying here as well
the same thing Luke who by the way is a
traveling companion of Paul at this time
uh he says the exact same thing that
Jesus had taught both of them verse 26
Brothers sons of the family of Abraham
and those among you who fear God to us
has been sent this message of this
salvation for those who live in
Jerusalem and their rulers because they
did not recognize him nor understand the
utterances of the prophets Nim which are
read every Sabbath fulfilled them by
condemning him they fulfilled the
prophet's
prophecies by condemning him and though
they found in him no guilt worthy of
death they asked pilate to have him
executed and when they Carri when they
had carried out all that was written of
him they took him down from the tree and
laid him in a tomb but God raised him
from the dead and for many many days he
appeared to those who had come up with
him From Galilee to Jerusalem who are
now his witnesses to the people and we
bring you the good news the gospel of
what God promised to the fathers this he
has fulfilled to us their children by
raising Jesus as also it is written in
the second Psalm so now he expressly
States out from the cavim you are my son
today I have begotten
you and as for the fact that he raised
him from the dead no more to return to
corruption he has spoken in this way I
will give you the holy and sure
blessings of David that's from the Nim
verse 35 therefore he says in another
Psalm kavim you will not let your Holy
One see corruption for David after he
had served the purposes of God to his
generation fell asleep and was laid with
his fathers and saw corruption but he
whom God raised up did not see
corruption let it be known to you
therefore brothers that through this man
forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you
and by him everyone who believes is
freed from everything from which you
could not be freed by the law of Moses
therefore beware lest that which is said
in the prophet should come about look
you scoffers be astounded and perish for
I am doing a work in your days a work
that you will not believe even if one
tells it to you and that from the
nebim I include this sermon here not
only because it's an incredible sermon
and
um but also because it tells us what
exactly the contents were with regards
to
some greek-speaking Jewish and Gentile
god-fearers living in Antioch of pidia
which is an Asia Minor far away from
Israel recognized that when the term law
and Prophets is expressed it contains
also the Kim it contains the writings
and because of this these quotations and
citations show us that this tripartite
division is included when we hear the
apostles Express the term law and
Prophets that expresses to us something
quite clear in the New Testament
documents it expresses to us something
that we need to actually take to heart
because if we are going to look into uh
the history of all of this we need to be
able to see from the scriptural
perspective what exactly is going on
when for
instance excuse me when for in
Jesus Expresses in Luke 16:16 that the
law and the prophets were until John
since then the gospel of the kingdom of
God has
preached which means that the same thing
that Paul is saying at Antioch of pidia
in Acts 13 is the same thing that Jesus
was preaching in the Gospel of
Luke that the law and the prophets were
until John and then since then the good
news of the kingdom of God is preached
the law and the prophets were before
John
what is made up of the law and the
prophets from a Jewish perspective the
law and the prophets is
all of the books that are found in the
tripartite divisions again we haven't
gotten to the list of first century Jews
and what they thought of the tripartite
division I just want you to be able to
see at this point that it absolutely
includes them when these references go
through with common parlance that the
term law and profits is shorthand for
something a lot more that really helps
us understand references of Paul even
when he's writing to the Romans for
instance in Romans chapter 3 something
that I think gets passed over so quickly
but shouldn't be when you're reading
Romans chapter 3 obviously if you know
the gospel and you know that Romans 3:21
through uh you know 25 is super
important passage with regards to the
righteousness of God through faith in
Jesus Christ it's an incredible passage
but it contains right in here a
canonical
statement listen to it but now the
righteousness of God has been manifested
apart from the law although the law and
the prophets bear witness to it the
righteousness of God through faith in
Jesus Christ for all who believe for
there is no distinction for all have
sinned and fall short of the glory of
God and are justified by his grace as a
gift through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus whom God put forward as a
propitiation by his blood to be received
by faith this was to show God's
righteousness because in his Divine
forbearance or patience he has passed
over former
sins it
wasn't clear what Jesus was going to do
and now it
is this is the reference in the argument
that the Apostle Paul is making that the
law and the prophets do bear witness to
the righteousness of God but we have
have seen it fully thoroughly and
clearly in the revelation of Jesus
Christ this righteousness of God that
didn't belong to us but the law spoke
about now it's been manifested apart
from the law even though the law and the
prophets as we've already seen Paul
doing this this includes all three parts
of the Jewish
Canon the righteousness of God through
faith in Jesus Christ for all who
believe is witnessed to and there but
not
clear the Apostle Paul's argument is
what wasn't very clear now is because of
Jesus's
coming Jesus himself uses the
terminology law and Prophets on multiple
occasions um most specifically one that
I'm working on right now in The Sermon
on the Mount he does it twice in fact
there there two book ends to his uh to
to some of his reasonings in in Matthew
5:17 do not think that I have come to
abolish the law of the prophets I have
not come to abolish them but to fulfill
them he goes on to clarify that not a
single you know pen stroke not a single
dot is going to pass away from it until
all is
accomplished and then he in his
application section with regards to the
manifestation of the righteousness of
God in his disciples lives in Matthew
7:12 he expresses that the outcome of uh
of of following after and of possessing
and living out the righteousness of God
was you say in Matthew 7:12 he says so
whatever you wish that others would do
to you do also to them for this is the
law and the
prophets that is the application of it
we treat others with love and deference
the same way we treat the Lord the same
way the Lord treats us the same way
others should be treating
us right the same thing that he says in
Matthew
22 when they when they were asking him
about the greatest commandment responds
you shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart with all your soul and
with all your mind this is the great and
first commandment the second is just
like it you shall love your neighbor as
yourself and then he includes this on
these two Commandments depend all the
law and the
prophets this is not a rare terminology
this is not an unusual way to refer to
it this is a common way we see it in
fourth mccabes we see it in Paul we see
it in Jesus we see Jesus actually
expressing very plainly something else
as well but I want to give you a bit of
a historical background on the
tripartite divisions here because all of
this is building up to a case here I
want I want you to see every bit of it
and I could have just told you what was
the Old Testament can of the first
century but I wanted to walk you through
all of these things so bear with me a
bit longer we're going to go back to 150
BC part of the Dead Sea
Scrolls if you are familiar with the
Dead Sea Scrolls I hope you have heard
of 4qmmt before if you have not uh go
look it up it's actually quite
interesting um but I want you to see
this tripartite division exists not only
in the 1 Century but also in the 2
Century
BC 4qmmt is a text among the Dead Sea
Scrolls that contains 22 legal
statements about all manner of religious
practices we'll come back to the number
22 in a second in its exhortation
section of this document it contains a
fragmented yet
clearly three-fold division of the
scriptures referred to as the book of
Moses the books of the prophets and
David now you may be looking at that and
going what why why would they call the
Kim uh David why would they why wouldn't
they call it the you know uh the graphia
the writings or something like this
there's all manner of ways that the
third part is referred to uh here it's
referred to as David Jesus we'll see
refers to as the psalm some people refer
to the other writings the the expression
there that is that is taken out when it
refers to either the largest or the
first book in the Kim the largest and
first book are both the same it is the
Book of Psalms also known as the Psalms
of David and so um you know it it is
common even there to refer to the very
first one as the title for all of
it so for instance when we come we move
forward to again we're still in the
second Century BC 132 BC uh we know this
one direct this is the prologue to the
book of sirak uh or
ecclesiasticus uh is actually a trove of
references worthy of our time here again
speaking of the tripartite
division now the book of serak is
written by the grandson or descendant of
uh Jesus spens Surak uh who had lived
before him who was translating into
Greek because it was originally written
in here Hebrew but sirak here um his
grandson is translating his
grandfather's work and he makes
references to these things and I want
you to I want you to see how he thinks
about the scriptures in 132
BC now there are by the way sir is one
of the apocryphal books it is considered
canonical uh by certain parts of the
church um and not by Protestants and you
won't find it in in our Bibles but they
do consider this canonical and so I want
you to see here this is one of the
reasons why I'm using first and second
mccabes and serak to make these cases we
can use all manner of other things but I
wanted to use these watch the prologue
here many great teachings have been
given to us through the law and the
prophets and the others that followed
them and for these we should we should
praise Israel for instruction and wisdom
now those who read them must not only
themselves understand them but must also
as lovers of learning be able through
both speaking and writing to help The
Outsiders so my grandfather Jesus now
that's not Jesus says in Jesus the
Christ that is Jesus benak his
grandfather who had devoted himself
especially to the reading of the law and
the prophets and the other books of our
ancestors and had acquired considerable
Proficiency in them was himself also led
to write something pertaining to
instruction and wisdom so that by
becoming familiar also with his book
those who love learning might make even
greater progress in living according to
the law
he says you are invited therefore to
read it with Goodwill and attention and
to be indulgent in cases where we may
seem to have rendered some phrases
imperfectly despite our diligent efforts
in translating again he is translating
his grandfather's Hebrew work
ecclesiasticus into
Greek this is the book called
ecclesiasticus or in some Canon list
they call it sirak same
thing he says for what was originally
expressed in Hebrew does not have exact
the same effect when translated into
another language not only this book but
even the law itself the prophets and the
rest of the books differ not a little
when read in the
original thus ends his prologue now this
shows not only a tripartite division it
also shows that he was highly aware that
there was a much different quality to
what was originally considered scripture
the the the law the prophets and the
rest of the books where he says even the
law itself and the prophets and the rest
of the books do not differ a little when
they are translated into Greek from
Hebrew right which shows by the way the
existence of Greek translations in the
world in the year 132
BC Greek translations of at least parts
of the law the prophets and the
writings it shows that people especially
in Alexandria were attempting to express
this in ways that are
understandable now when we understand we
are not here mainly for that we're going
to talk all about the uh the apocryphal
books uh at a later time I'll introduce
them here in a second but uh we're going
to have an entire episode of those later
on but here I just want you to see this
tripartite division here law prophets
and the rest of the books again we're
going to go to Jesus's words who also
does and testify to the tripartite
collection again I know this episode is
a little bit different than the typical
ones we do but this stuff's so important
that I I want you to have all the tools
with you that I would I would bring if I
was if I was teaching on
this again Jesus's own words this is uh
right about the year 30 or 33 ad uh
depending on when you take uh the the um
the ministry of Jesus happening uh this
is immediately after his resurrection
found in Luke 24:
44-48 the Gospel of Luke said says then
he said to them these are my words that
I spoke to you while I was still with
you that everything written about me in
the law of Moses and the prophets and
the Psalms must be fulfilled and then he
opened their minds to understand the
scriptures now
stop this is one of the strongest
statements that we have in the
scriptures regarding the contents of the
Old Testament Canon it does not surprise
and should not surprise any of us that
what he addresses here is the tripartite
division of the Hebrew Cannon he says
here that it is the law the prophets and
the Psalms again the Psalms is the
biggest and first book of the uh kavim
and so the expression out here to call
it the law of the prophet in the Psalms
is yet another version of expressing the
tripartite divisions here all of these
things and then it says it follows it up
with then he opened their minds to
understand the scriptures and said to
them thus it is written that the Christ
should suffer on the and on the third
day rise from the dead and that
repentance for the Forgiveness of sins
should be proclaimed in his name to All
Nations beginning from Jerusalem you are
witnesses of these
things that shares the exact same thing
that is expressed by him elsewhere that
the law and the prophets prophesied up
until John and now the good news of the
kingdom is preached into all the world
these are the references that we should
hold fairly close to the chest Jesus
himself God incarnate is letting us know
that the three version the tripartite
division of the scriptures is what he
inspired that is massive witness there
but I want you to go even further than
that I want you to turn back into Luke
11:
47-51 so back you know what 13
chapters there's an addendum here to
Jesus's references of uh of the stories
of the woes towards the
Pharisees that includes a fascinating
reference it says here in Luke 11:47 woe
to you for you build the tombs of the
prophets whom your fathers killed and so
you Witnesses and you consent to the
Deeds of your fathers for they killed
them and then you build their tomb
s therefore also the wisdom of God said
I will send them prophets and apostles
some of whom they will kill and
persecute so that the blood of all the
prophets Shed from the foundation of the
world may be charged against this
generation now buckle up here for a
second from the blood of Abel that is
found in the Book of Genesis the very
beginning of the Torah to the blood of
Zachariah who perished between the Altar
and the sanctuary yes I tell you it will
be required of this generation now who's
this Zachariah Zachariah here the
perishing between the Altar and the
sanctuary takes place in 2 Chronicles
chapter 24 why is this
important it's important because the
layout of the tripartite division of the
Hebrew Canon starts with Genesis and
ends with 2
Chronicles this is not only a tasset
agreement that all of the martyrs of the
age of the scriptures takes place this
is also a tcid understanding that the
same layout at least as far as for the
first and the last book uh are present
in Jesus's time as well as For Those
whom he's speaking to this is common
reference this would be a common way to
refer to it it's kind of like if
somebody stands up in church today and
says I believe all the Bible everything
from Genesis to Revelation just because
they don't list out first John doesn't
mean they don't uh agree with first John
this is this is a this is a common way
to refer to the entire thing we use it
the same so did
he all of the blood of how many of the
prophets all the prophets Shed from the
foundation of the world may be charged
against this generation and then he
takes them not not chronologically
strictly he takes them
canonically and lists it out from Abel
to Zachariah who in their Canon of
scriptures is in the last
book who perished between the Altar and
the sanctuary yes I tell you he says it
will be required of this generation from
the very beginning of the first book to
the last book of their Canon which again
I will simply also add shows that Jesus
considered the definition of this
person's death to also be included in
the scriptures and it is part of the
kavim
now all of that to be said is then okay
so we have references here do we do we
have a Canon list because everyone wants
a Canon list right well we could I could
walk you through the New Testament and
its Canon lists and all this kind of
stuff um but I would rather give you or
you know what it's references are What
It quotes from and all these things we
could do that um and suffice it to say
it would it'd be a very easy case you
can find such cases made all over the
New Testament quotes from the Torah the
neim the
kavim all the time and so you this
that's not even a debatable point that
they consider these things scriptures
it's one of the reasons why no Christian
disputes the canonicity of these 39
books none that's not how it works right
uh and neither did the Jews in the first
century and those who are going oh there
really wasn't a Canon this and that let
me let me now kind of go to a direct and
full first century historian uh that
does actually have pretty Undisputed
authenticity uh for it occurring in the
first century and so we can talk about
whether or not this lines up with
everything we've been discussing so far
his name is
Josephus uh every one of you would have
heard of him before um and he addresses
this in his uh in his book on the
history of of what has been going on and
addressing the history of the Jewish
people now here's the nice thing is we
have a Jewish historian who himself has
been proven historically accurate in all
manner of things which means we have a
very reliable source we also have an
eyewitness to some of the events that he
has occurred and someone who actually
not only is himself a Pharisee and of
that tradition but also knew the other
Traditions knew things about them has a
concurrent or at least a living at the
same time perspective of others that
really really really helps it doesn't
mean he is unbiased it just means this
is reliable source if you're going to
have issues with Josephus I don't know
how you have issu how you don't have
issues with absolutely everything uh
Josephus is pretty undisputable on this
watch this his quotation here he says
for we have not an innumerable multitude
of books Among Us disagreeing from and
contradicting one another as the Greeks
have we have only 22 books now again I
told you to pay attention to that number
uh 22 is a super important number we'll
come back to it in just a second we have
only 22 books which contain the records
of all the Past Times which are justly
believed to be divine and of them five
belong to Moses which contain his laws
and the traditions of the origin of
mankind till his death this interval of
time was little short of 3,000 years but
as to the time from the death of Moses
until the reign of arz Xerxes King of
Persia who reigned after Xerxes the
prophets who were after Moses wrote down
what was done in their times in 13 books
and the remaining four books contain
hymns to God and precepts for the
conduct of human life now watch it is
true our history has been written since
Artis Xerxes very particularly but ha
not been esteemed of the like Authority
with the former by our forefathers
because there ha not been an exact
succession of prophets since that time
now stop right there this backs up
everything we've been reading even first
and second mbes and the prologue to
sirak uh the the letter that we have
from uh Judas macabus is brother uh
every reference we have says the same
thing there is no more prophets since
the time has closed with
Malachi everyone recognized that the
time of the prophets had ceased the
later talmudic writings express the same
thing we don't have the the the voice of
the prophets anymore we now just have
the daughter of the voice uh everyone
recognized this the prophet prophets had
ceased and so the writings that came
after that do not have the same
Authority as the former ones by our
forefathers here Josephus is in the
first century not as a Christian by the
way as a Jewish historian is writing the
same thing about their history there has
not been an exact succession of prophets
since that time that time meaning of the
time of Malachi and now firmly we have
given credit to these books of our own
nation is evident by what we do for
doing for during so many ages as have
already past no one has been so bold as
to either add anything to them or to
take anything from them or to make any
change in them but has become natural to
all Jews immediately and from EV from
their very birth to esteem these books
to contain Divine doctrines and to
persist in them and if occasion be
willingly to die for them
unquote there's a few things I would
like to focus you on one we have the
exact same thing here a tri partite
division Torah prophets and the uh the
remaining books that contain a variety
of things hymns to God precepts for the
conduct of human life etc etc that would
be the writings or the Psalms as Jesus
refers to them or as the prologue the
sirak refers to him as the other
writings these three sections of the
Hebrew Canon make it undeniable for what
is being referred to here he not only
explains out that the Torah here the
first first section has the five belong
to Moses Genesis Exodus Leviticus
Numbers
Deuteronomy they contain his laws
Traditions Etc the interval of time was
less than you know was a little short
than 3,000 years but from the time of
the death of Moses until the reign of
arz
Xerxes right when we express these
things now we are talking about the age
of the
prophets and when we're when we're
addressing that it really calls to mind
that we should understand not only time
and placement but we should also
understand when these things come to an
end the story of arz Xerxes comes to an
end in the late fth Century or the late
400s
BC so from the death of Moses until the
reign of arz Xerxes King of Persia who
reigned after Xerxes so that's from
Moses's day all the way down to Arta
Xerxes the prophets who were after Moses
wrote down what was done in their times
in 13 books
now again that's going to take
everything from
Joshua all the way down through Malachi
so all the prophets starting with the
former prophets uh that would include
from Joshua the time of the judges uh
Samuel um you know uh in the first and
second Kings uh that's going to include
all sorts of things like this there's
the former prophets and then there's the
latter Prophets The Times of Elijah and
Elisha uh then you've got Jeremiah and
Lamentations and all of these types of
things everything all of the Minor
Prophets all the Major Prophets that's
all in the neim right and so what he is
deducing here again he uses collapsible
ones here uh you have 13 books uh in
there he combines things like the Book
of Judges and Ruth down to a single book
uh he combines uh Jeremiah and
Lamentations into a single book uh and
he combines the 12 Minor Prophets down
to a single book uh that brings their
count to 13
uh the remaining four books uh he says
contain hymns to God and precepts for
the conduct of human life we can see
here that the way he lays it out is a
little bit different than how the modern
one lays it out because the modern
Tanakh will lay it out uh and most other
references here including the one that
Jesus would have used laid out
thematically uh with 2 Chronicles
actually being part of the kavim and
closing out the Canon but you know I
mean I understand Josephus here he's
laying it out historically and then
putting the ones that aren't historical
at the end um you know as far as for
that is concerned but that tripartite
division still again he's writing as a
historian he's still holding to the
tripartite division but you can see even
some movability between these ones
because in his in his breakdown of it he
says there's only four books in the
kavim that would be essentially what we
would call wisdom literature the Psalms
proverbs Ecclesiastes and song of songs
uh the rest of the cavim he obviously
counts in the prophets because 13 books
would have been made up of uh starting
with Joshua again he would do this
historically and so he arranges it
historically Joshua being one uh
combining together judges in Ruth which
is uh brings this count from 24 to 23
and then Samuel both 1 and 2 Samuel is a
single book that's the classic Jewish
Canon list Kings first and second Kings
being one book uh that's classic again
then Isaiah then Jeremiah and
Lamentations combined together that's
how brings this count from 23 down to 22
then Ezekiel and then the 12 Minor
Prophets is a singular book Daniel job
job nobody knows what to do with all
right I mean job job should be inserted
in right around Genesis 12 uh job is
just a Bizarro one Ezra Nehemiah as a
single book Esther and then the
Chronicles 1 and 2 Chronicles is a
single book so um now in the class
Arrangement that's not Desiring to sit
here and and and work out exact uh hisor
uh historicity you're you're talking
about a thematic layout that ends with
several of those that He includes in the
neim back into the Kim but again it's
kind of like going up to somebody and
saying hey you know is is the Book of
Job history or is it uh or is it
prophetic you know is it wisdom
literature or is it uh history right is
uh is is the Song of Solomon what you
know what does it exactly settle into
there is a tripartite division there is
agreement on what the books are but then
you'll see certain people move them
around as to which one's which now the
Psalms are always in the kavim they are
never in the prophets uh same with
Proverbs and so forth but uh we can see
even from josephus's own list that while
the content of the books meaning all 39
of these are counted for here in his 22
uh how exactly he divides it out does
show that there's variance among that
but not variance among the Canon itself
as a
list now there
are there is actually something quite
interesting here uh his desire to get it
down to 22 books rather than 24 is um is
it does happen in some lists and it
happens in others as well um but it is a
good example of something that that
Hebrews uh loved to do and that was to
to make something reflective
symbolically of their uh alphabet and so
you'll see 22 all over things like this
so the desire to get it down from 24 to
22 uh is actually really uh I think it's
awesome but U you know it doesn't at the
end of the day it doesn't really matter
if we're combining Jeremiah and
Lamentations or we're splitting them as
Jeremiah and Lamentations it doesn't
make any difference as far as the
scripture is concerned in short Josephus
has all 39 books of the current Hebrew
Canon which is also identical to the
Protestant Old
Testament I want you to see reference to
this here first of all there's going to
be objections right the the common one
of there was no settled Cannon um yeah
there was uh there there were
discussions it doesn't really make much
of a difference but as far as for Jesus
and the apostles are concerned uh we
clearly see they have the same
tripartite division that has always
existed among the Jewish people that
these writings were sacred that they
were kept separate and they were
understood to be the source of God's
inspiration and divine Authority uh we
have references all throughout that
history of these things that's not
really honestly up for discussion
whenever Jesus talks about the scripture
whenever the uh the quotations are taken
of these things it it falls to us to
recognize uh what it's all coming from
and we're going to uh see that at the
end here so there was no settled Cannon
is not an accurate statement uh it was
Undisputed in the first century to be
the law the prophets and the writings
and by the way that's also the
Undisputed nature of it now it is the
one thing that Jews and Christians agree
on it is the one thing that all
Christians and Jews agree on is that
these 39 books are from
God it is still Undisputed I I I want to
emphasize that over and over and over
again
because water gets murky with all this
kind of stuff when we bring up other
things
um and it's it gets murky because people
want to make it murky because they want
to add stuff to this but I cannot
emphasize far enough the Same Old
Testament the same Hebrew scriptures
that Jesus and the apostles Josephus and
others had is the same one that we all
agree on today Jew and Christian
alike that needs to settle into our
minds very
solidly there was a settled Cannon there
still
is and so some will come up then with
the next objection say the Sadducees
rejected the kavim and the neim did they
though when we read Josephus the Jewish
historian really for the first century
who knew the Sadducees personally now
granted he he is he is living at the
same time them he is in a different a
different party right uh essentially a
different theological Camp than them but
this would immediately destroy any of
his credibility if he's going to write
something that can immediately be
rejected by Sadducees who is still
living at the time that he is writing
this in the year
95 I want you to I want to remind you of
what he just said we we just read he
says no one has been so bold as to
either add anything to them or to take
anything from them or to make any change
in them but it is become natural to all
Jews immediately and from their very
birth to esteem these books to contain
Divine doctrines and to persist in them
and if occasion be willingly to die for
them the idea that the Sadducees whom
Josephus personally knew were an
exception to this is conjecture and
little else unfortunately the main ones
who passed that idea down to us are
someone named
hippolytus uh presumably of Rome but in
reality we have no idea where he lived
uh who wrote a book called reputation of
all heresies and origin who is uh
another Christian writer in the 3rd
Century these these again are over a
hundred years after the Sadducees die
out origin is writing uh a book called
against celsus and the two of them
hippolytus and origin make reference to
the
Sadducees um in not so many words but
essentially spelling out that they only
held to the first five books you know
because of their denial the resurrection
which is clearly taught in the neim and
the Kim and stuff like this but um
there's a couple issues with this one is
that hippolytus and origin have no
actual historical overlap with the
Sadducees Josephus does Josephus is
writing his history he's writing a
concurrent history it would it would be
similar to um if Josephus was wrong on
this it would be similar to the New York
Times today trying to write something
about Republicans whom they disagree
with uh regarding that Republicans
actually really really love raising
taxes right despite what everyone says
right now right it would be something uh
outlandish like that or um you know uh
or or they you know they they really
love welfare you know there's there's
not a there's not anyone who would hold
them credible if they were writing about
something like that even if it is
writing about their opponents but hippo
origin have no connection with these
things um and one of the problems is
that they seem to have Blended their
view of the Sadducees with that of the
Samaritans it's actually shows up in
hippolytus uh reputation of all heresies
there um and the Samaritans are the ones
that only held to the Samaritan pituk um
there's really no nothing Beyond
conjecture to say that and in fact it
does go against the historical evidence
that we really do have um the Sadducees
would have held to every and the
reasoning comes out and I know why the
reasoning happens because you know Jesus
quotes the he only quotes the penit when
he refutes them uh that one time um
problem being that they also didn't
agree that Angels
existed right which happened all over
the Torah the problem with the Sadducees
wasn't that they had the wrong Cannon
the problem with the Sadducees is they
didn't know how to rightly interpret
it kind of the same thing with the
Pharisees
as my pastor said growing up the
Pharisees had everything right they had
the cannon right they had the laws and
everything like that they had the right
luggage the right Dock and everything
the only thing they missed was the
boat great quote by the way I love
it another issue that comes up is what
about the apocryphal
books and again I will say we will do an
apocryphal book Overview at some point
don't worry this is not my only
statement on these things we're going to
get into those pretty big when they
become influential later on uh once we
get into that era uh and when they
really become part of church history
we'll do an entire episode on them uh if
I don't do that or if I forget to do
that somebody remind me about that uh
these books are also known as the dudor
canonical books or the secondary Canon
which should immediately tell you what
the historical perspective on those is
right now uh just with that very name
throughout church history all the way up
to the 16th century uh about which there
has and I I want to emphasize this
heavily about these books there have
always
always been disagreement over their
status as
canonical
always okay there is never a time where
all Christians agree that these are
canonical never never they have been
disputed since the very beginning when
they were first being put up as
something that should be considered
canonical that problem rests for those
who consider these things to be
canonical
Catholics have some of them in their Old
Testament Eastern Orthodox have several
more and the ethiopic Canon has still
more
why why because
Greek I might give you a little
lightning introduction to
these but remember we will deal with
these at a later date let's talk about
Greek just a bit the New Testament was
written entirely in Greek making the
language itself
which was already the language of the
day even more so for the church most of
the Old Testament quotations occurring
in the New Testament are from Greek at
least as far as we know uh and and they
were from Greek translations of the
Hebrew but I want to express the a
little bit of caution on this a lot of
people speak with broad brushes with
this and say oh you know 80% of this
quotations are from the sepen look we we
really don't know the exact contents of
the septent uh at the time that this has
been being writting we don't there are
multiple other Greek translations as
well that have not survived history
other ones from the second century that
have not survived as well um there's the
old Greek for instance as well that we
know and the septent was not a singular
translation either we'll talk about that
in a second um but and and there's times
where we really don't know if that the
Apostle or Jesus himself is using a
custom translation because they also
knew Hebrew uh so trying to sit down and
go boom here's the mathematical this and
that of which one comes from which Greek
translation or whatnot we it's there's a
lot of conjecture being brought into
that but suffice it to say uh most of
the Old Testament quotations occurring
in the New Testament are going to be
from the Greek
translations of the Hebrew the early
church wrote in Greek the early church
spoke Greek and so they naturally
gravitated to using Greek translations
of the Old Testament rather than the
Hebrew in fact that happens super early
in church history when I say super early
I mean really early like first
century um and especially 2 century and
by that point when we start going on the
knowledge of Hebrew
dies you I mean th this this immediately
sets up distance between the Greek
knowing church and the Jewish people
that was part by Design too an
increasing suspicion about the Jewish
people about the Hebrew language about
the value of things like the septent uh
and and so forth in the early
Church in the 2 Century by the time that
we come to the midc century there are
four major Greek translations of the
Hebrew scriptures that we know by name
that does not mean they're the only ones
there's several more that we can
certainly account for with regards to
variations in translational
methodologies but as far as for the
massive four named ones that are uh that
are broadly important at least in the
scholarly works of the late 2 Century we
have four of them they are known by name
the
septent the Aquilla the seacus and the
theodocian now I again I'm not going to
sit here and and talk about all these
yet we'll talk about those at the close
of the 2 Century somewhere along the way
when we talk about the Old Testament uh
and its Greek translations some are very
literal some are very uh you know
dynamic
yeah it's really quite fascinating study
to get into um there were other Greek
translations of the Old Testament
scriptures as well but they have all
passed from memory not only have have
evidences of them almost entirely
disappeared from the historical record
so have references to them uh some of
them we don't even know by name and we
use terms like the old Greek because you
know even the sepag gental translations
right is is an umbrella term there's not
a single bound book called The septent
in the first century that does not exist
it's not even not a single book and
collection with a single agreed upon
table of contents it's not even a single
translation or a single time of
translations um even though the sep
gentle translations are the most
influential they're very different than
one another uh but it is the main
collection of Greek translations of the
Hebrew scriptures that uh that the
apostles in the early church used and as
Christianity moved out of the immediate
vicinity of Israel knowledge of Hebrew
as I said died out it died out almost
completely in fact the only uh early
church writers that we have any
documentation of that new Hebrew to my
knowledge are origin and
Jerome and so the influence of the Greek
translations especially the oldest one
that survives by the end of the 2
century is the septent uh
it's it's uh the lxx is the abbreviation
of that just means 70 uh the the septent
translations uh become the Old Testament
of the early church and again it is not
a bound volume it's not a single book um
it is found on manuscripts that include
other books that nobody considers to be
scripture um there is no singular table
of contents for the sepen so when
somebody says you know whatever was
included in the sepen was automatically
that they're they don't know what
they're talking about these these things
included all manner of of things there's
not bound copies of the septent in the
first and second centuries like that um
we we we do know copies often included
the apocryphal writings later on um but
again the term septent is really just an
umbrella term for what originally was
just the translation of the Torah alone
into Greek in the 3rd Century BC um
someday we will spend in the second
century when we get into the Greek
translation ation of the Old Testament
for the early church we will spend an
entire episode I assume on the sepen its
history uh its contents throughout
history and so forth you when you get
into some of these large Cotes if you
want to see how different they are look
at the look at the Cotes in the fourth
Century that we have vaticanus
alexandrinus um caticus and look at
their look at their content lists their
table of contents vary from one another
uh especially in the Old Testament
writings um with regards to the
apocryphal writings and some additional
ones that nobody thought scripture you
know it's that kind of stuff is is worth
considering if you're wanting to dive
into this deeper rather than just say
simple
things you know apocryphal usage uh so
again we're back to the first century
did the Old Testament Canon contain the
apocryphal books in the first century by
by what evidences we have I'll give you
two big ones so that we can answer that
question one is Pho
Pho of Alexandria lived at the same time
of Jesus he was a philosopher in
Alexandria Egypt who wrote extensively
on combining Jewish and Greek thought
into more of a syncretic
philosophy um I address him here because
he gives us a good snapshot of a
well-learned well-informed Jewish
thinker at the time of Christ somebody
who would have been personally
acquainted with the septu gental
translations because he lived in
Alexandria where that was
done in his writings are contained
roughly
2,200 quotes from the Hebrew scriptures
now I don't want to misrepresent him in
any way the absolute vast majority of
them are from the
Torah but his references to the neim and
the Kim are also quoted dozens of times
each you know what is never quoted Any
of the Apocrypha books at all not at all
no citations no quotations not a first
mcabe second acabes syak Judith Tobit
none of
them how about Jesus never a
scripture they can reference books that
aren't canonical they do that for first
Enoch which you know vast majority of
Christians do not accept you know book
of Jude refers to that that doesn't make
it canonical a citation of something of
scripture would be thus it is written or
did you not read what the Lord said to
you here or have you not read the
scriptures or this must be fulfilled or
what was said by the prophet those are
citations as scripture for Jesus and the
apostles they never once cited the
Apocrypha is this that as a Christian
should mean a lot to
you I don't mean Illusions to something
that may or may not look the apocryphal
books contain in some of them legitimate
history and others not at all but some
of them have their legitimate history it
would be part of their memory it' be
like in a sermon illustration if I
referenc George Washington that does not
mean I think George Washington is an
apostle just because I reference him
doesn't make that sound now if I'm going
to say now thus says the Lord through
George Washington well now we got a
whole another problem on our hands don't
we no Christian rest assured here at the
end the Hebrew scriptures the Tanakh the
39 books of the Protestant Old Testament
they are in your Bibles and are indeed
the one in the same Old Testament of the
first century the old can the Old
Testament Canon of the first
century the same 39 books that are
universally recognized by every
Christian Church as inspired scripture
are the same 39 books that are in the
Protestant Canon the same Jewish
scriptures from the first century that
both Jesus held to and the
apostles I want to emphasize here at the
end Protestants are not the outliers on
this
topic we are the historically consistent
ones
Rome moved the dudo canonical from
disputed to canonical in 1546 at the
Council of
Trent those books had been disputed in
the west by all sorts of people in every
Century including the very translator of
the Bible from Hebrew and Greek to Latin
the very translator of the Latin Vulgate
himself Jerome disagreed that any of
them were scripture and held to the same
39 books we do mainly because he knew
Hebrew the Eastern Orthodox Church
largely settled their issues with a
definition of the canon in 1672 at the
Senate of Jerusalem yet another response
to the Protestant
reformations why is it the Protestants
got this right they got it right because
Sol of scriptura they wanted to go back
to if we are going to treat something as
it ought to be if we are going to treat
it as the highest Authority we best make
sure we include nothing that is not
scripture
now nobody has any dispute these days
about the contents of the New Testament
but there are disputes over the
apocryphal books but I will simply point
out as again there are no disputing the
39 books that are in the Protestant
Canon every single one of us agree that
those are
scripture make no mistake both of those
churches Rome the Eastern Orthodox
Church they are the outliers on this
issue they disagree with each
other they disagree with Jewish they
disagree with the Protestants they only
agree with
themselves Protestants have on their
side the Jewish people who were
entrusted with the Oracles of God up to
the first century Jesus in his
references the apostles and their
references all of their citations all of
their explicit references to the law and
the prophets Jesus's explicit references
to the law of the prophets in the Psalms
the first century Jews as we see both in
Pho and in Josephus both from the
philosophical side of the world as well
as the historical side of the world with
Jews expressing in their citations and
in their explicit Canon lists the exact
same Canon we have not only that we have
first century Jews and we have first
century Christians using the same Canon
for the Old Testament scriptures that we
do Paul taught Jesus from synagogue to
synagogue from the law and the
prophets now go read your Bibles Lord's
blessings
[Music]
[Applause]